Stargate, put that
name down in your books
'cause I think you're
gonna hear a lot about
it in the future.
A new American company that
will invest $500 billion,
at least in AI infrastructure. The
data centers are actually
under construction.
The first of them are under
construction in Texas.
The Abilene location, which
is our first location,
Abilene is a town on the
western central Plains of Texas.
We kind of scratch
and fight for everything
good that comes our way.
I had people reaching out
and they said, when is the
president gonna come see you?
And I said, well, he
hasn't texted me yet so.
I'm thrilled we get to do this in the
United States of America.
I think this will be the most
important project of this era.
Welcome to Abilene, Texas.
This is the site of Project Stargate.
A very mysterious, much talked about,
much speculated about project
that brings together OpenAI,
SoftBank, Oracle.
If it all comes together building
after building on this red
dirt behind me will be filled
with chips that'll
power the AI revolution.
What we're undergoing right now is sort
of the largest infrastructure
build in human history.
It's gonna create new
ways of doing business,
it's gonna create new ways of invention
and it's gonna really
drive humanity forward.
I was in the real estate business.
These buildings, these are
big, beautiful buildings,
are gonna employ a lot of people.
How do you personally grapple
with the pace of it all?
It does feel like it's going very fast.
I certainly think if I could
like transport myself back
three years ago, it would seem
like unimaginable progress.
This is amazing explosive
growth of intelligence
that's coming in our decade.
Everything will change.
When Stargate was first
announced there was a
lot of skepticism.
A lot of people thought it's
just too big to be true.
So this is your very first look.
Hello. Hey Emily. Thank
you so much for having us.
Welcome to Abilene. It's
so awesome to be here.
Yeah, it's all happening.
I know.
How many people are on this site
Today we have about 2200 people on site.
The guy at the heart of
the Stargate Build in Abilene
is Chase Lochmiller.
He's the founder of Crusoe,
the little known data center startup,
overseeing this massive project.
We started construction
here last June, June of 2024.
This was just a com, a complete
barren field right? There was
So there was nothing here in June.
There were a bunch of mesquite
trees and bushes and brush.
Stargate is so mysterious.
What actually is happening here?
What will eventually be here
is eight separate buildings
all containing very large clusters
of fully interconnected GPUs.
Yep. We're gonna do a
tour of some of that.
This is gonna get us around
that whole 1200 acre campus.
Hey, we're going on an adventure.
It's like getting around
Jurassic Park. I love that.
Alright, let's go offroading. Yeah!
I feel like we're going
on a data center safari.
It is much like a data center safari
Crusoe eight planned
buildings will hold up
to 400,000 chips, which
would make this one
of the world's largest
known compute clusters.
The partners behind
Stargate, OpenAI, Oracle
and SoftBank have committed
a hundred billion dollars
to the project so far
and claim they're prepared
to put in five times that
as they expand to multiple sites.
This first site in Abilene
has been dubbed Project
Ludicrous as in
Ludicrous speed.
Ludicrous speed, which is appropriate.
The whole thing is supposed
to be done by mid 2026.
Are you round the clock? 24 hours a day?
We're, we're round the clock.
It is very much a 24 7 operation.
We're trying to deliver on,
you know, the fastest schedule
that a a hundred megawatt or greater
data center's ever been built.
So why the ludicrous rush?
Well, because Stargate is
part of a much larger AI race.
Companies like Microsoft,
Meta, Google, Amazon,
and xAI are all building AI data centers
of their own at sites
across the US and beyond.
Each company wants to have
the most capable AI being used
by the most people
and they've committed tens of billions
of dollars to make it happen.
There's no reason we won't
scale up our computing a
hundred thousand times in a few years.
I'm good for my 80 billion, right?
I'm going to spend $80
billion building out Azure.
The downside of being behind
is that you're out of position
for like the most important technology
for the next 10 to 15 years.
But beyond just making better
AI, many tech leaders want
to be the first to create AGI artificial
general intelligence.
A super smart agent that can think
and learn just like a human if not better.
Large language models like
ChatGPT have gotten more
capable as the technology's evolved.
So the hope is that adding
an astronomical amount
of compute will make
them even more capable.
Take me back to the beginning
before Stargate, what
did you start seeing
that made you realize
we need more compute,
more power, more connectivity.
Yeah,
That you were hitting a
limit and needed to scale.
We used to think a
lot about the compute.
We would need to train the models
and what we didn't use
to think about as much as
how much people were
gonna use these models.
And we did think about it, it
just turned out people want
use the models much more than we imagined.
And a couple of years ago, maybe
after the launch of GPT 4
in chatGPT,
it really started to hit
like, oh man, this is,
this is like gone from a lot of compute
to like the biggest
infrastructure project in history.
And out of that emerged Stargate,
Why call it Stargate?
It began as a code name and
sometimes code name stick,
But it means something, right?
Oh,
The design of one of
the very early layouts
of a data center looked a
little bit like Stargate from
the, from the show.
How did you get to
talking with Masayoshi Son
and Larry Ellison and how
did you all come together?
I did two kind of long
trips around the world
and a lot of it was to talk
to developers and governments,
but a lot of it was
also to just really try
to like get my head
around the supply chain.
On one of those trips I met with Masa
and we got to speaking about,
you know, what it would take
to do compute at this kind of scale.
Hi Masa. It's so nice to see you.
What conversations did you have
with Sam that led to Stargate?
Well, we have a shared vision of
AGI coming soon and we need compute
Of all the bets you could make.
Why this? Why Stargate?
Well, I, I believe in
the vision that this AI
the AGI will change the mankind's life
in every aspect
and we are lucky to see
this enormous revolution
and I, I'd like to be part
of that and get excited.
Last month I came to
celebrate your winning
and promise that we will
invest $100 billion.
And you told me, oh Masa go for 200.
Now I came back with 500.
Explain the math to us.
How does it all add up
to needing $500 billion?
Well, that covers the
capacity we think we need
for the next few years given
our growth projections.
The, the interesting question
is, if we had a, if we knew
how to get a trillion dollars
right now, if we don't,
would we be able to deploy
that profitably in the next few years?
And I'm not sure about that,
but I feel confident we can like make
500 billion of value back.
Alright, so what are we seeing?
There's many forklifts
and there's many cranes,
there's many dump trucks,
there's many excavators.
New creatures emerge at every turn.
Are most of the workers from Abilene?
We're a very large
employer here in Abilene,
but we, we have brought
in a lot of labor from
outside the city and outside the state.
We actually have workers
from seven different states.
I've never built anything of this scale.
It's one of the underappreciated aspects
of AI is actually just the physical
infrastructure that's needed.
This is awesome. Awesome.
I love it.
We're building stuff. Yes.
There's 155 vehicles
that are moving dirt
moving earth right now.
There's something so
satisfying about seeing
lots of dirt being moved.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
If you look at that crane,
like this red crane
That's a 600 ton crane.
So, I have no like, how does
that compare to other cranes?
It's, it can lift a lot.
It can, it can lift a lot of weight.
I mean 600 ton, that's like
a hundred elephants, right?
This is actually
happening around the world.
Data centers are being built in Malaysia
and Japan and France.
I, I think the demand
for compute infrastructure,
it's not a US phenomenon,
it is a global phenomenon.
A lot of countries had actually decided
that data centers are, are
critical infrastructure
that must be accelerated.
So if, if hyperscalers
are going to Malaysia
or Japan, is that competition for you?
We don't really see it as competition.
We, we kind of see it as, you know,
just an overall growth of the sector.
We think we have, you know, a
lot of unique ways of doing it
and a lot of value to add
in the, in the process.
But, you know, pretty just excited
by everything happening in the space.
Lochmiller's path to
leading the Stargate build has
been circuitous.
He's climbed five of the
so-called seven summits,
the tallest mountain on each continent
and worked in physics and finance.
Tell me about your journey before Crusoe.
You grew up in Denver,
you started out using AI
as a trader on Wall Street.
Yeah, we were big early adopters
of deep learning using these
multi-layer neural networks
to predict returns for certain securities.
And, you know, we found
them to be fairly effective.
I had high conviction
that AI was gonna transform everything.
It sort of always felt
like this, this meta science.
Lochmiller eventually left
finance to get into crypto,
not in the get rich quick
hyping meme coins way,
but in the hundreds of computers
solving math problems way.
His idea was to build Bitcoin
mining operations near oil
rigs, taking advantage
of a quirk in the oil drilling process.
When an oil company drills for oil, one
of the associated byproducts
of that is natural gas.
And when they don't have
access to a pipeline, all
of this associated gas is
just being burned off on site.
And so we had this concept
that instead of trying to bring
that gas to a market
where you can sell it,
we could bring a market to the gas.
We could build these mobile
and modular data centers
and bring them directly to the wellhead
and then use that power
to power the data center.
It was a good idea
with unfortunate timing.
The crypto market crashed.
You then went from bitcoin mining to AI.
It almost sounds like going
from one hype cycle to another.
Yeah, it may seem like
that from the outside,
but I, I'll say that, you
know, from very early on we,
we had planned to build an
AI infrastructure business.
So what do Bitcoin mining
and AI data centers have in common?
Number one, they, they both
consume a tremendous amount of energy.
Number two, they're both
more location agnostic than
traditional data centers.
Northern Virginia is
largely perceived to be sort
of the center of the world
for data centers today.
That's data center 1.0. Right?
That's data center 1.0.
Virginia's data center alley
is where the first generation
of cloud computing was built close
to the government agencies
that created the original internet.
Those data centers are full
of CPUs, basic computer chips
that power everyday things
like social media streaming.
And the cloud. Stargate,
on the other hand, is part
of a new era of data centers full of GPUs.
The special advanced
chips needed to power AI
and do lots of tasks at once.
So this is the inside of a data center.
This is the inside of a data
center under construction.
Okay.
They're going to be...
Very active construction.
It is a very active construction site.
So you can take 'em through one of these.
Okay.
Yeah. And then move the hallway. Okay.
People look like they were
working very hard and fast.
People never love when I
show up for data center visits.
No. Why? It's not my area
of expertise and yet I have opinions.
And so people are like, okay,
you know yeah, leave us alone.
So we are gonna go to one
of the GPU data halls where
they'll, there will be a very
large cluster of Blackwell GPUs
Blackwell is the newest AI
optimized chip from Nvidia.
Once the eight buildings of
Project Ludicrous are complete,
Each of them will hold up to
50,000 chips to be installed
by Stargate partner Oracle.
Wow.
This is where the GPUs will going.
This is where the GPUs are going.
I've been waiting for this.
This is where the AI factory will be.
All right.
This is what an AI factory looks like
And it truly is like a factory.
But the difference is the, the end product
that gets manufactured
here is intelligence.
And the sooner this
AI factory starts up the
better for OpenAI.
In March, the company rolled out a new
and improved image generator for chatGPT,
which quickly became almost
too popular to handle.
I've seen viral moments,
but I have never seen anyone have to deal
with an influx of usage like this.
You added a million users
in an hour or something like
that.
Yeah, I mean more, some hours.
But yeah, it was like
un unprecedented wild.
And also like making an image is not a,
it's not exactly like a
low compute task the way we
we do it with the new image gen.
You tweeted that the
GPUs were melting you.
Yeah. I didn't realize people were gonna
take that. Literally.
I, I, I mean I get that it was a
joke, but it's..
They're running very
hot, but like the metal is
not actually melting.
So we had to do a lot of
very unnatural things.
We had to, you know, borrow
compute capacity from research.
We had to slow down some other features.
'cause it's not like we have
like hundreds of thousands
of GPUs sitting around
just like spinning idly.
If we had more GPUs, we would be more able
to handle demand surges like this.
So it's that directly linked.
Yeah. You know, more compute
means we can give you more ai.
So one of the things to just take note
of is just the amount of
stuff happening overhead.
You can kind of see these very large pipes
that distribute cold water to,
to the individual trips,
to cool them down.
The water is needed
because GPUs run very hot
and keeping them cool typically
involves an evaporation
process that can consume millions
of gallons of water per day.
That's raised concerns
about the sustainability
of this AI boom.
With Stargate though, Crusoe
says it's bypassed this problem
using what's called a closed loop system,
which keeps the water
permanently encased within pipes.
You can put a million gallons in
and then you don't need more forever.
Yeah, that's, that's essentially right.
We, we basically fill it one
time and then we're done.
And that's something we
can easily coordinate
with the city in terms of, you know,
getting a million gallons
of water one time.
It's a far different ask
than, you know, asking
for a million gallons an hour
or some other crazy request,
which could be the case if you had an open
loop cooler architecture.
So once this is all built,
what's the grand vision?
Give people tools
to let them do whatever
they're gonna do better.
People will use it and
unleash their creative energy
and make all sorts of
stuff that you and I love,
or some stuff that we don't,
or stuff to just entertain themselves.
Personally, the area I'm
most excited about is AI
for scientific discovery.
You know, we're not there
yet, but we're not far away.
I think 2025 will be a world
where we have agents do a lot
of work, but work of the kind
of work things we already know how to do.
I'm hopeful that 2026 will
be a big year of like really
new scientific progress.
Hmm. But in order for that to happen,
buildings full of chips aren't enough.
You also need energy, lots
and lots of energy that could
be a problem for the climate
and a limiting factor in the growth of AI.
Sam Altman's been hunting for
more compute for a while now
and it seems like energy
is a big constraint.
Can you explain that?
Like what are the limits?
Let me sort of put this
in perspective for you.
If you look at a data center 20 years ago,
an individual rack in the
data center would typically be
budgeted to consume between
like two and four kilowatts.
Today with the latest
and greatest configuration
from Nvidia, you know,
we budget 130 kilowatts per rack.
So you're talking about almost two orders
of magnitude increase.
To put it another way, asking chatGPT
a question uses about
10 times as much energy
as a Google search.
It is a complete transformation
in terms of the amount
of infrastructure required
to support this workload.
And so that has become
the major bottleneck.
So AI data centers can't
be located just anywhere.
You need a location with
lots of available power
and West Texas happens to fit the bill.
We came to Abilene honestly
because it's a community
that's very rich in low
cost and clean energy.
A lot of wind development has happened in
and around the Abilene region
and what they lack is
actually demand for power.
That created a massive
opportunity for AI, which is
so hungry for power in this moment.
This is the first 200 megawatt
substation right over here.
There's gonna be developed
an incremental one gigawatt substation.
So the total power capacity
for the site will be a total
of 1.2 gigawatts.
All right, so we're talking
bigger than a gigawatt.
Bigger than a gigawatt. Yeah.
Everybody seems to want a
gigawatt or more these days,
If that sounds like a lot.
Well, it is enough to
power about 750,000 homes,
2,600 Tesla model threes or
100 million LED light bulbs.
There's a funny Back to the Future quote
where he says 1.21
gigawatts wait 21 gigawatts.
And because it's 1.2 gigawatts,
it's kind of a funny,
As more and more AI data
centers come online in the next
few years, they'll add
many gigawatts of demand
to an already overstressed grid.
According to one estimate,
data centers could consume more than 8%
of America's electricity by 2035.
And while the International
Energy Agency predicts
renewables will meet
about half that demand,
the rest will mostly
come from coal and gas.
Crusoe is even building
its own gas power plant on
site as a backup.
Every major tech company has
this net zero pledge by 2030.
Are our AI ambitions
running directly counter
to our climate goals?
It's complicated. My
personal perspective is we're,
you know, none of those pledges
are gonna be met by 2030.
And there's ways of kind of
fudging it where like, you know,
you're buying a bunch
of recs or offsets,
but the actual energy that's being used,
there's no way it's gonna get
to a hundred percent carbon
free power production
to power all of the AI
infrastructure that's being developed.
It's just, it's just like
fundamentally not possible.
So the tech companies
are lying or fudging it?
That's a, that's a good
question. You're good.
No, look, I, I mean I think, I think a lot
of these goals were ambitious and,
and a lot of the goals predated the demand
that people are experiencing
from AI infrastructure.
So I think AI has actually kind
of changed their, changed their path.
Now the optimist in me says
that while it may get worse,
before it gets better, there
is light at the end of the tunnel.
And I think the fact
that AI is a massive tool
for invention, it's actually gonna
accelerate the development.
A lot of, a lot of new
technologies, the fact
that we're building a
lot of new infrastructure
that requires a lot of energy
actually provides this massive
opportunity for AI to be
one of the early adopters
of new energy solutions.
Things like small modular reactors,
geothermal, nuclear fusion.
You know, the fact that, you
know, AI has a massive demand
for energy, puts it in a position
to actually intentionally decide
what does the energy infrastructure
look like that's gonna power it.
For now, Stargate seems to
have the resources it needs
to accomplish its goals,
but with huge investments come huge risks.
Bloomberg's Brody Ford
has been following Stargate
and the many ways it could go wrong
or right for the Stargate partners
and for the city of Abilene.
Thanks for coming on the
dream. Yeah, thank you.
We got the cactus right behind
you too. I love it. Yeah.
What's your impression of Stargate?
It's happening, right?
I mean there's a lot of
naysayers on the internet
that nothing of it about
it's real, but it's clear.
I mean, it is a massive project.
The fact that they're talking
about having, you know,
a gigawatt of capacity
live in about two years.
It's an ambitious target.
And seeing that in person kind of showed
how frantic the whole thing feels.
A gigawatt is huge.
Oh, it's huge. It's
comically big, right?
I mean nobody was saying these kind
of numbers two years ago.
Yeah. How does this compare
to other big tech
projects in other places?
We've been tracking a lot of
the big data center projects.
I mean, data center spending
has ramped in the last couple
years, the past 200 billion
in CapEx in the last year.
I think two big projects
that people are really watching
right now is here in Abilene
for Stargate and Elon's
build out in Memphis.
Both have been thought
to be the largest computing
clusters at various moments,
depending on who you ask.
But I think what unites them
is just the fact that they need
so many chips and it's the
amount of labor coming into them.
This is, to me a very big thing.
$500 billion Stargate
project I think is gonna be
something that's very special.
The number $500
billion. Is that for real?
I don't think anybody
thinks they're gonna
hit 500 billion.
Maybe I will eat my
words. No, I came back.
SoftBank has a reputation
for buying toward the top for
getting into projects
once the hype cycle is
already pretty advanced,
I'm very confident we don't need
$500 billion in one day.
We go step by step. Okay.
So we are, we are very
confident to make it happen.
This is a lot of money
and you know, not all of
your bets have paid off.
Where do you get your conviction?
Well, you know, sometime I get
crazy over excited and I make mistake.
Like WeWork and you
know, I have many scars,
but when you have a conviction
and a passion, you,
you actually learn more from
those mistakes and the scars
and that will make you stronger.
Where's the money going? Like
who's the real winner here?
So yeah, I think we've all
seen Nvidia stock go up an
insane number and said, whoa, how is
that spending ramping so heavily?
It's these data centers, right?
I mean in what we saw
today, 400,000 chips,
that's conservatively 15 $20 billion
AI holds incredible promise for all of us.
Let's talk about Oracle.
Yes.
Like what is Oracle's role?
For a long time, you know,
the leaders in offering cloud
infrastructure forever was,
you know, Amazon, Microsoft,
to lesser extent Google.
People weren't taking Oracle
seriously for a long time.
But with the AI boom they
have shown they're able
to make these really vast
data centers quickly.
And so their role here is
essentially putting in the
servers, putting in the fiber optic cable
and getting that compute over to open ai.
I mean, the underlying
theme here is that OpenAI
and companies like it need
as much computing power as they can.
They're looking for
creative ways to, you know,
conjure up those funds.
And Oracle is a company that says, oh God,
do you wanna pay us to build
out these data centers?
Absolutely, count us in.
The sizes keep getting bigger.
Yeah.
And bigger.
Is there a chance we're
overbuilding? Do we need all this?
God, every single day
somebody has a different take, right?
Every single day like we
saw with DeepSeek, right?
That, wait a second,
do we really need all
of this infrastructure
For those not obsessively
following every twist
and turn in the AI race?
DeepSeek is a Chinese company
whose own AI model went
viral in January.
Their AI performed at a similar
level to leading US models,
but used far fewer computing resources.
This raised the question,
are Stargate scale mega
projects really necessary?
DeepSeek appears to have
found a more efficient way
to power AI.
Was that a moment of rethink for you
and are you doing
anything differently now?
I think the DeepSeek
team is very talented
and did a lot of good things.
I don't think they've figured
out something like way more
efficient than what we figured out.
But do you think there
is a more efficient way to
power AI?
Oh, I'm sure. I'm sure we will.
We have made incredible
efficiency strides year over year
and I'm sure we'll keep
doing that in the future.
So if that's the case, why
are you building all this?
If we had an AI that we
could offer at one 10th
of the price of current ai,
I think people would
use it 20 times as much
and we would still need
twice as much compute
to satisfy the then current demand.
Some companies seem less, sure.
Microsoft for example,
announced that it was pausing
or canceling several
data center builds in the
US and abroad.
A lot of folks worry that we aren't
that far from seeing some kind
of pullback, some kind of wall.
It's kind of like how all the
big tech companies were hiring
every single person they
could in 2020, 2021.
Then at one point they
started firing people.
And I think we're at this point
where every time a lease gets
canceled for a data center,
people wonder, oh, did we hit this moment?
Do we really need all
of this infrastructure?
Is there really a payoff in the end?
Are folks going to use these tools enough
that it's gonna pay for
all of this build out?
How confident are you
that OpenAI is going
to be a financially sustainable
and profitable enough company
to justify all of this investment?
It's looking like
we're doing really well.
I mean, like we have to,
we are definitely doing
something unprecedented.
You know, it seems like a, I like,
I feel confident in the bed.
It doesn't mean something can't go wrong.
What are the risks?
I mean, maybe, you know,
people stop wanting to
like pay for AI services
and then we have a difficult
financial position.
What do you say to the people out there
who think this is a massive boondoggle?
Look, I mean, I think there's
always gonna be doubters,
but I, I think the, again,
i, the, the, the money piece.
I think so long as AI is
delivering value to society,
the money will be there to
build the infrastructure.
I have no concerns around that.
Even if it's not all a hundred
percent accounted for today,
that money is there
and there's a lot of money that wants
to invest in this category.
What we're undergoing right now is sort
of the largest infrastructure
build in human history, right?
This is like where we built
the interstate hi highway
system, you know, that enabled
massive interstate commerce
and transportation and
catalyzed this massive
boom in the US economy.
What's happening in AI
infrastructure is we're building the
super highway system
that's gonna enable modern
intelligence systems,
that's gonna create all
sorts of new job categories
that don't even exist today.
It's gonna create new
ways of doing business,
it's gonna create new ways of invention
and it's gonna really
drive humanity forward.
The data center boom isn't
just affecting the AI business.
There are local impacts
too across the country.
Places like Abilene are trying
to attract data center
projects and the jobs
and tax revenue that come with them.
I make a dollar a year
being mayor, so I've,
I've gotta have another business.
So your side business is still the
pest control?
Okay. Yeah, I'm a hard killer.
How would you describe Abilene?
Well, Abilene, it's an
old railroad town, you know,
so we have lots of Western heritage,
but that doesn't mean that
we don't want to grow and,
and, you know, look forward to the future.
We want our city to grow and,
and we look forward to these
opportunities that are coming to us.
What have you heard
about the Stargate project?
It, it could quite possibly
be the largest AI data center
in the world, and that
excites me, need to know
that we're gonna be a
front runner in technology
right here in West Texas.
I've spent the last couple
of months looking at some
of these biggest projects.
I'm trying to see what
documents we can find.
How have these, you know,
some of the world's largest,
most powerful companies been interacting
with these local municipalities.
Largely what we have found is
that these local towns are
willing to forego quite a bit
of tax revenue, quite a
bit of control to be able
to bring these big companies. Then
What is Abilene giving
up to have Stargate here.
So what Abilene agreed to with Stargate
with this data center is 85%
of tax revenue off the property tax wiped.
So they're, they're
they're losing out on 85%.
Yeah, I mean I'm sure they would say,
and the developers would say
that you're still getting a lot
of property tax revenue and
that's probably true, right?
But these are pretty tough
deals being struck, right?
I mean, I think a lot of these
smaller towns did not take
place in the tech boom
of the last 20 years.
All of those jobs went
to the coasts, right.
And I think there's a lot of
local city leaders who want
to be able to say, we're a part of this
and they're willing to strike
some pretty extreme deals
to make it happen.
You're giving up 85% in in tax revenue.
Yeah, we're getting 15%
of billions of dollars.
So that's the way I look at it, right?
It it is a large tax increase.
We're talking millions of
dollars on an annual basis.
It's gonna help us to pave
streets, to hire police officers
to do the things cities due.
When you were negotiating,
did you feel like there was a
risk they could go elsewhere?
Like were you worried
about not winning the deal?
Whenever you're
attracting a prospect, yes,
you always worry about that,
but at the same time,
if it wasn't gonna work
for both parties, we
weren't gonna lay down
and just get run over
by these people either.
How many jobs do you think
Stargate will really create?
Well, I'll tell you what I've heard.
So somewhere between 4
and 1200 there's gonna be security.
There's gonna be maintenance,
you know, they're gonna have grass.
People are gonna mow grass out there.
So there's gonna be all
kinds of jobs that go
with something that large too.
Other than just the technical jobs.
We think about tech investments
and tech campuses as
kind of these thousands
of high paying jobs
with, they're really kind
of boosting local economy.
Once data centers are completed,
it's often not a lot of full-time workers.
How many people does it really
take to run a data center?
Like I keep thinking about
that scene in Silicon Valley
and there's one guy in that data center.
There's really no difference between day
and night down here.
So it makes things easy.
There are gonna be
quite a few people here.
I know you're looking for
a specific number from me.
I know, but I can't give it to you.
What if they don't create
as many jobs as you hope for?
You know, I don't know
a lot about AI centers
or how many people they employ.
I mean, I'm gonna be honest about that,
but you know, they're still
building the facility.
They're still putting million, billions
of dollars into the economy
and so we are just
trusting, you know, we have
to have a little trust
with these partnerships.
We're in downtown Abilene
right now. It's really windy.
I can see why this is a
good place for wind power.
Ah, we just wanted to
talk to people to see
what they think about Stargate,
if they've heard of it.
So we're gonna go try to find
some folks and not blow away.
So have you heard of Stargate?
I have
Until recently, I had not.
Have you heard of Stargate?
No.
It was announced by Trump
and that's, that's kind of
really all that I've heard.
I know that it has to do with AI
and is supposed to bring maybe
a lot of people to Abilene.
It's gonna be a big server farm.
Yeah.
And, and employ quite a few people.
What do you think about that? Oh,
Computers are good things.
I'm a computer guy. Did that in the Army.
I invented computers.
Oh, you invented computers?
Yeah.
So what do you hope it brings to ay?
I would love to see more people here
and especially like it
would help local businesses.
For Abilene, for West Texas.
I think it creates a,
a, a huge stream of jobs
that aren't readily available.
Meth and alcohol addiction
is huge in this area
because one of the only jobs
available is oil and gas.
And so this adds something different and,
and hopefully breaks some of those cycles.
Do you have any concerns like about like
how much power they're
gonna use or water and,
You know, I know that AI
takes up a lot of power to use,
but I'm not too sure what
exactly it'll do to Abilene.
I, I feel like I'm not concerned
on that side of things.
It's gonna use a lot of power.
Does that concern you?
That's all good.
What's wrong with that?
No, it might put some
stress on the Abilene grid.
They need to increase the grid then.
What do you think about ai?
So AI has terrified me for 20 years.
I think there are so many questions
that we don't have answers
to when it comes to AI.
I think we're biting up way
more than we can chew.
Do you use AI at all?
I actually do use ai. Yeah.
Our professors at ACU sometimes
recommend that we use it.
I think it's a good thing. I
think it can be used two ways,
either creatively or kind of a crutch.
So how do you feel about the fact
that Abilene's gonna be the
site of this big development?
I love, I love jobs coming to Abilene,
but I, I'm not excited about it.
Where are we going and
how do you even fight it?
The big picture to me
is AI's gonna take over
and then where are we as humans?
You know, it just, it, it terrifies me.
It honestly just terrifies me.
Well, mixed reviews,
there's definitely a lot of questions.
We'll have to see how the project pans out
and it's gonna happen over years.
So it could be a while
before we know for sure.
There is this lofty promise
that AI data centers are gonna create
thousands and thousands of jobs.
Meantime, AI is destroying jobs elsewhere.
Yeah, and I feel like even, you know,
there is serious anxiety out there.
People are scared.
Totally.
Even among the best engineers
and technologists, people are scared.
What do you say to those people?
AI is for sure going
to change a lot of jobs.
Totally take some jobs away,
create a bunch of new ones.
This is like the kind of, this is
what happens with technology.
And in fact, if, I think
if you look at the history
of the world, like
that's just been
happening for a long time.
The thing I think the
world is not ready for.
Like people have maybe
abstractly thought like, okay,
it's gonna be a better programmer than me.
It's gonna be, you know,
better at customer support and whatever.
I don't think the world
has really had the humanoid
robots moment yet.
Like the first day you're
like walking down the street
and there's like seven robots
that walk past you doing
things or whatever.
It's gonna feel very sci-fi.
And I don't think that's very
far away from like a visceral
like, oh man, this is gonna do a lot
of things that people used to do.
So, so yeah, it's coming
and we, we have always tried
to just be super honest about
what we think the impact may be.
Realizing that we'll be
wrong on a lot of details.
Lately, predicting the future
of AI seems harder than usual.
In a few moments I will sign
a historic executive order,
instituting reciprocal tariffs.
President Trump's tariffs
and the increasing volatility
of geopolitics have created
potential challenges
for the AI infrastructure boom
and shaken up the race to dominate AI
between the US and China.
Technology faces rising costs.
Building these data centers
just got conceivably more expensive.
It's very difficult
to immediately decouple.
Uncertainty is bad for business.
Instead of moving forward,
people have war rooms about, oh,
what's tomorrow gonna look like?
Former diplomat, Anja Manuel
and Bloomberg, Shirin Ghaffary
have been closely watching
how this could impact
projects like Stargate.
How much does the AI and
data center supply chain
depend on China?
Yeah, so a lot of the
materials that are used
to build data centers, a lot
of those materials actually
come from China, right?
Aluminum, steel. China's
a major manufacturer.
That could be an area of impact on raising
construction center costs.
Now on the chip side, that's
a much bigger higher cost
for these companies, right?
And that there's a lot more uncertainty.
The most sophisticated chips
are manufactured in Taiwan,
Korea, Japan often brought to China
to be integrated into
all of the electronics
that are in all of our pockets.
This is a really complex,
totally international supply chain.
And I think the takeaway
for everyone is you cannot just break the
international trading system.
And we cannot be a country
that lives in autarky.
We're always gonna depend on others.
What does Stargate mean
for the US China tech race?
I think it's one critical
step in so many steps.
When you look at the race that's on
between the US and China.
We're in a real race. The Chinese are
giving us a run for their money.
China's right behind us.
I mean they're, we're very, very close.
50% of the world's AI
researchers are Chinese.
That doesn't mean we can't
collaborate with the Chinese
and certainly means we
should keep talking to them.
But where you used to
have some level of trust
and some level of communication,
now you don't have it.
And I worry that the tariffs not directly,
but indirectly are making
us lose that kind of trust.
Now that we're in this position,
there's obviously this tension
between the US and China.
Is this an opportunity
to do it a different way
to build data centers a different way?
I think that's exactly right.
This is an opportunity
to do it differently.
What I would like to see is that
more advanced manufacturing
of the most sophisticated
chips happens here.
And I think TSMC is doing some of that.
Others, the CHIPS Act really helped.
Also, going back to
Stargate, those data centers
and all of the AI training
and the AI inference shouldn't just be
happening in the United States.
It be happening in friendly
allied countries as well.
Iceland, Greenland, the
Nordics that have lots
of geothermal power
should be a part of it.
Europe should be a part of it.
Japan, our friends in Asia, Singapore,
there's really an opportunity
here to have a community
of like-minded countries
that are doing this together.
Is President Trump alienating many
countries that would be our
allies in this endeavor?
Yes. Some of our friends
and allies feel a little bit alienated.
I hope ultimately that won't be the case.
I think increasingly the
administration will understand
how important our partners are
and how much they add to us.
And so I actually believe
will come out okay in the end.
There are still many questions about
where the business of AI is headed.
The expense of building
and running these data centers makes it
tough to turn a profit.
OpenAI, for example, ran
a $5 billion loss in 2024.
And there's no guarantee that
simply adding huge amounts
of compute will make AI models smart
and reliable enough to
be truly transformative.
So as solid and substantial
as Stargate might seem,
it's surrounded by uncertainty
about how smart AI can get,
which bets will pay off
and what kind of future we're creating.
The tech industry goes
through booms and busts.
AI goes through winters and springs.
How long is this boom gonna last...
I think this boom has
quite a bit of legs to it.
You just sort of look at
the long-term investments
that the biggest companies
in the world are,
are making in this.
And I think, you know, even
with things coming out
like DeepSeek you know,
I think everybody's
pretty unanimous in terms
of we're staying the course.
What's required for AI to scale
is a lot more infrastructure
and there's a bigger risk to
underinvestment than over investment.
If ChatGPT were to
discover a Stargate,
a futuristic wormhole
that we could
all travel through
what's on
the other side?
If ChatGPT could like
transport us to the future?
Yeah.
I mean, no, no, no one knows, right?
Do I think I could have sat here in 1905
and told you what we were
about to discover in physics
and that 40 years later we
would like have an atomic bomb?
Definitely not.
And I, I think I am way too
self-aware of my own limitations
to sit here and try to
say I can like tell you
what's on the other side of
that wormhole. I have no idea.
But net. Net good. Yes.
Up and down. Not better in every way,
but yeah, I think up to the
right, yeah, up into the right
with some choppiness.